docs: Add ADR for leader elector as extension (#1596)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/013-leader-receiver-creator-as-extension.md

# 13. Leader Receiver Creator as Extension

Date: 2024-11-08

## Status
Proposed

## Context

> Telemetry OTeL collector collects metrics exposed by the Kubernetes API server using [k8sclusterreceiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sclusterreceiver), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Telemetry OTel Collector collects metrics exposed by the Kubernetes API server using [k8sclusterreceiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sclusterreceiver), 
```

and custom resource metrics are collected using [kymastatsreceiver](https://github.com/kyma-project/opentelemetry-collector-components/tree/main/receiver/kymastatsreceiver). 

> To run these receivers in high availability mode and prevent sending duplicate metrics, we've implemented [singletonreceivercreator](https://github.com/kyma-project/opentelemetry-collector-components/tree/main/receiver/singletonreceivercreator) based on [leader receiver creator](./012-leader-receiver-creator.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run these receivers in high availability mode and prevent sending duplicate metrics, we've implemented [Singleton Receiver Creator](https://github.com/kyma-project/opentelemetry-collector-components/tree/main/receiver/singletonreceivercreator) based on [Leader Receiver Creator](./012-leader-receiver-creator.md).
```

I just now noticed the spelling in both original docs.

## Decision

> However, after feedback from community and careful deliberation, the `singleonreceivercreator` would be better suited to be used as an extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, after feedback from community and careful deliberation, we realize the `singleonreceivercreator` would be better suited to be used as an extension.
```

[Extensions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/extension/README.md?plain=1) provide additional functionality to the collector, but do not need direct access to telemetry data and are not part of the pipelines.

Implementing `singleonreceivercreator` as an extension brings the following advantages:
- It is signal-agnostic.
- It can be used with any receiver.
- It brings simpler and clear configuration.
- It's future-proof.

It has following disadvantages:

> - The receiver must be modified to support the leader election extension.

Reviewer: - Which "receiver"? k8sclusterreceiver or kymastatsreceiver, or both?
- Which "leader election extension"? The one we're about to create, meaning Singleton Receiver Creator as extension (instead of as part of the pipeline)? Will this extension be called Singleton Receiver Creator or get another name (like "leader election extension")? I'm slightly confused by the terminology here.

Author: any receiver that wants to use this extension, has to be modified to have support for the extension. Currently we have 2 receivers that would require this support. K8sClusterReceiver and Kyma Stats Receiver. Changes to Kyma stats receiver is easy as its maintained by us. Changes to K8sClusterReceiver is slightly tricky as its upstream receiver and changes there would take quite sometime to be incorprated and could be used in Kyma again.

Reviewer: Then plural would be good

```suggestion
- The receivers must be modified to support the leader election extension.
```

Furthermore:
Which "leader election extension"? The one we're about to create, meaning Singleton Receiver Creator as extension (instead of as part of the pipeline)? Will this extension be called Singleton Receiver Creator or get another name (like "leader election extension")? I'm slightly confused by the terminology here.

Author: The name of the extension we thought is leaderelector. Singleton receiver was a receiver which will be deprecated and removed in favour of leaderelector. Leader elector is an extension which implements leader election mechanism (something native to kubernetes).

### Leader Election API

```yaml
receivers:
  dummy/foo:
    interval: 1m
    leaderelector: leaderelector/foo
  dummy/bar:
    interval: 1m
    leaderelector: leaderelector/bar
extensions:
  leaderelector/foo:
    auth_type: kubeConfig
    lease_name: foo
    lease_namespace: default
  leaderelector/bar:
    auth_type: kubeConfig
    lease_name: bar
    lease_namespace: default
```

> The leader elector extension would contain the configuration providing lease name and namespace. This extension would be then referenced in the receiver.

Reviewer: Which "receiver"? k8sclusterreceiver or kymastatsreceiver, or both?

Author: any receiver that wants to use it and has support built. In our case it would be both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The leader elector extension would contain the configuration providing lease name and namespace. This extension would be then referenced in the receivers.
```

### Consequences

> The `singletonreceivercreator` (https://github.com/kyma-project/opentelemetry-collector-components/tree/main/receiver/singletonreceivercreator) would be deprecated and removed. The `kymastatsreceiver` and `k8sclusterreceiver` would use the leader elector extension for leader election.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Singleton Receiver Creator (https://github.com/kyma-project/opentelemetry-collector-components/tree/main/receiver/singletonreceivercreator) would be deprecated and removed. The `kymastatsreceiver` and `k8sclusterreceiver` would use the leader elector extension for leader election.
```

# 13. Leader Receiver Creator as Extension

Date: 2024-11-08

## Status
Proposed

## Context

> Telemetry OTeL collector collects metrics exposed via Kubernetes API server via [k8sclusterreceiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sclusterreceiver) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Telemetry OTeL collector collects metrics exposed by the Kubernetes API server using [k8sclusterreceiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sclusterreceiver), 
```

> and custom resource metrics are collected via [kymastatsreceiver](https://github.com/kyma-project/opentelemetry-collector-components/tree/main/receiver/kymastatsreceiver). In order to run these receiver 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and custom resource metrics are collected using [kymastatsreceiver](https://github.com/kyma-project/opentelemetry-collector-components/tree/main/receiver/kymastatsreceiver). 
```

> in high availability mode and prevent sending duplicate metrics, [singletonreceivercreator](https://github.com/kyma-project/opentelemetry-collector-components/tree/main/receiver/singletonreceivercreator)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run these receivers in high availability mode and prevent sending duplicate metrics, we've implemented [singletonreceivercreator](https://github.com/kyma-project/opentelemetry-collector-components/tree/main/receiver/singletonreceivercreator) based on [leader receiver creator](./012-leader-receiver-creator.md).
```

> was implemented based on [leader receiver creator](./012-leader-receiver-creator.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Decision

> However, after feedback from community and careful deliberation the `singleonreceivercreator` would be better suited to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, after feedback from community and careful deliberation, the `singleonreceivercreator` would be better suited to be used as an extension.
```

> used as an extension. [Extensions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/extension/README.md?plain=1) are used to provide additional functionality to the collector. These components do not need direct access to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Extensions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/extension/README.md?plain=1) provide additional functionality to the collector, but do not need direct access to telemetry data and are not part of the pipelines.
```

> telemetry data and are not part of the pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Implementing it as an extension brings following advantages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementing `singleonreceivercreator` as an extension brings the following advantages:
```

> - It is signal agnostic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is signal-agnostic.
```

> - It can be used with any receiver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It can be used with any receiver.
```

> - Simpler and clear configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It brings simpler and clear configuration.
```

> - Future-proof

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It's future-proof.
```

It has following disadvantages:

> - The receiver needs to be modified to support leader election extension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The receiver must be modified to support the leader election extension.
```

### Leader Election API

```yaml
receivers:
  dummy/foo:
    interval: 1m
    leaderelector: leaderelector/foo
  dummy/bar:
    interval: 1m
    leaderelector: leaderelector/bar
extensions:
  leaderelector/foo:
    auth_type: kubeConfig
    lease_name: foo
    lease_namespace: default
  leaderelector/bar:
    auth_type: kubeConfig
    lease_name: bar
    lease_namespace: default
```

> The leader elector extension would contain the configuration providing lease name and namespace. This extension would be

Reviewer: what is "lease name and namespace"?
Did you want to say "at least name and namespace", as the minimum configuration?

```suggestion
The leader elector extension would contain the configuration providing lease name and namespace. This extension would be then referenced in the receiver.
```

> then referenced in the receiver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Consequences
The `singletonreceivercreator` (https://github.com/kyma-project/opentelemetry-collector-components/tree/main/receiver/singletonreceivercreator) would be deprecated and removed. The kymastatsreceover and 

> `k8sclusterreceiver` would use the leader elector extension for leader election.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
